# Joint HPC Exchange

The Joint High Performance Computing Exchange (JHPCE) is a
High-Performance Computing (HPC) facility in the Department of
Biostatistics at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health. This fee-for-service core is a long-standing collaborative
effort between Biostatistics and the Computational Biology & Research
Computing group in the department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology. The facility is open to all Johns Hopkins affiliated
researchers.

The facility is used primarily by labs and research groups in the
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health (SPH), the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine (SOM) and the Lieber Institute for Brain
Development (LIBD). We have over 800 user accounts, 400 active users
and approximately 100 unique users per quarter.

The computing and storage systems are optimized for genomics and
biomedical research. The cluster has 72 compute nodes, providing over
4000 cores, 30TB of DRAM and over 14 PB of networked mass
storage. Networked mass storage uses open-source file systems (ZFS and
Lustre-over-ZFS) and custom-built hardware. The latter includes a 5 PB
of Lustre file system space that may be the lowest-cost and
lowest-power parallel file system on the planet. We also have a 2PB
disk-to-disk backup system for backing up more critical data.

The JHPCE cluster is optimized for the embarrassingly parallel
applications that are the bread-and-butter of our stakeholders, e.g.,
genomics and statistical applications, rather than the tightly-coupled
applications that are typical in traditional HPC fields, e.g.,
physics, fluid-dynamics, quantum simulation etc. The network fabric
consists of a 10 Gbps ethernet. The facility is connected via a 40Gbps
network to the Universityâ€™s Science DMZ. Job scheduling is performed
with Open Grid Engine (OGE).

The JHPCE operates as a formal Common Pool Resource (CPR) Hierarchy
with rights to specific resources based on stakeholder ownership of
resources. To benefit the entire research community, excess computing
capacity is made available to non-stakeholders on an as-available
basis, in exchange for fees that defray the operating costs of the
stakeholders.

If your lab is interested in joining the JHPCE community, either as a
stakeholder or as a non-stakeholder, please contact the director
(jhpce@jhu.edu) to determine whether we can accommodate your needs.

If your lab is already a member, and you need to add new users, then
have the users fill out the [JHPCE new user request
form](https://jhpce.jhu.edu/register/new-user-request/).

Mark Miller and Brian Caffo  
Co-Directors, JHPCE

